I here do die.
So shaken as we are, so wan withcare,
find we a time for frightedpeace to pant
and breathe short-winded accentsof new broils
to be commenced in strands afarremote.
No more the thirsty entrance ofthis soil
shall daub her lips with her ownchildren's blood.
Nor more shall trenching warchannel her fields,
nor bruise her flowerets
with the armed hoofs of hostilepaces.
Those opposed eyes,
which, like the meteors of atroubled heaven,
all of one nature, of onesubstance bred,
did lately meet in the intestineshock
and furious close of civilbutchery shall now,
in mutual, well-beseeming ranks,march all one way
and be no more opposed
against acquaintance, kindred,and allies.
The edge of war, like anill-sheathed knife,
no more shall cut his master.
Therefore, friends, as far as tothe sepulchre of Christ,
whose soldier now, under whoseblessed cross
we are impressed and engaged tofight,
forthwith a power of Englishshall we levy,
whose arms were moulded in theirmothers' womb
to chase these pagans in thoseholy fields
over whose acres walk'd thoseblessed feet
which fourteen hundred years agowere nail'd for our advantage
on the bitter cross.
But this our purpose now istwelve month old,
and bootless 'tis to tell you wewill go.
Therefore, we meet not now.
Then let me hear of you, mygentle cousin Westmoreland,
what yesternight our council diddecree
in forwarding this dearexpedience.
My liege, this haste was hot inquestion,
and many limits of the chargeset down but yesternight
when all athwart there came apost from Wales
loaden with heavy news,
whose worst was that the nobleMortimer,
leading the men of Herefordshireto fight
against the irregular and wildGlendower,
was by the rude hands of thatWelshman taken,
a thousand of his peoplebutchered,
upon whose dead corpse there wassuch misuse,
such shameless, beastlytransformation
by those Welshwomen done
as may not be without much shameretold or spoken of.
It seems then that the tidingsof this broil
brake off our business for theHoly Land.
This match'd with other did, mygracious lord,
for more uneven and unwelcomenews came
from the north and thus it didimport.
On Holy-rood day, the gallantHotspur there,
Young Harry Percy, and braveArchibald,
that ever-valiant and approvedScot,
at Holmedon met,
where they did spend a sad andbloody hour,
as by discharge of theirartillery
and shape of likelihood, thenews was told.
For he that brought them, in thevery heat
and pride of their contentiondid take horse,
uncertain of the issue any way.
Here is a dear, a trueindustrious friend,
Sir Walter Blunt, new lightedfrom his horse.
Stain'd with the variation ofeach soil
betwixt that Holmedon and thisseat of ours.
And he hath brought us smoothand welcome news.
The Earl of Douglas isdiscomfited.
Ten thousand bold Scots, two andtwenty knights,
balk'd in their own blood didSir Walter see
on Holmedon's plains.
Of prisoners, Hotspur tookMordake, Earl of Fife,
and eldest son to beatenDouglas,
and the Earl of Athol, ofMurray, Angus, and Menteith.
And is not this an honorablespoil?
A gallant prize?
Ha, cousin, is it not?
Indeed, it is a conquest for aprince to boast of.
Yea, there thou makest me sadand makest me sin in envy
that my Lord Northumberlandshould be the father
to so blest a son,
a son who is the theme ofhonor's tongue.
Amongst a grove, the verystraightest plant,
who is sweet Fortune's minionand her pride,
whilst I, by looking on thepraise of him,
see riot and dishonor stain thebrow of my young Harry.
O that it could be proved thatsome night-tripping fairy
had in cradle-clothes exchangedour children where they lay
and call'd mine Percy, hisPlantagenet!
Then would I have his Harry andhe mine.
But let him from my thoughts.
What think you, coz, of thisyoung Percy's pride?
The prisoners which he in thisadventure hath surprised
to his own use, he keeps andsends me word
I shall have none but MordakeEarl of Fife.
This is his uncle's teaching.
This is Worcester, malevolent toyou in all aspects,
which makes him prune himself,and bristle up
the crest of youth against yourdignity.
But I have sent for him toanswer this.
And for this cause awhile wemust neglect
our holy purpose to Jerusalem.
Cousin, on Wednesday next,
our council we will hold atWindsor.
So inform the lords.
But come yourself with speed tous again,
for more is to be said and to bedone
than out of anger can beuttered.
How now, Hal.
What time of day is it, lad?
Thou art so fat-witted, withdrinking of old sack
and unbuttoning thee aftersupper
and sleeping upon benches afternoon,
that thou hast forgotten todemand that truly
which thou wouldst truly know.
What a devil hast thou to dowith the time of the day?
Unless hours were cups of sackand minutes capons
and clocks the tongues of bawds
and dials the signs ofleaping-houses
and the blessed sun himself afair hot wench
in flame-colored taffeta,
I see no reason why thoushouldst be so superfluous
to demand the time of the day.
Indeed, you come near me now,Hal,
for we that take purses go bythe moon and the seven stars
and not by Phoebus, he,
"that wandering knight so fair."
And I prithee, sweet wag, whenthou art king,
as, God save Thy Grace-- or"Majesty," I should say,
for grace thou wilt have none--
What, none?
No, no, by my troth, not so muchas will serve
to be prologue to an egg andbutter.
Well, how then?
Come, roundly, roundly.
Marry, then, sweet wag, whenthou art king,
let not us that are squires ofthe night's body
be called thieves of the day'sbeauty.
Let us be called, oh, Diana'sforesters,
gentlemen of the shade, minionsof the moon.
Thou sayest well, and it holdswell too,
for the fortune of us that arethe moon's men
doth ebb and flow like the sea,
being governed, as the sea is,by the moon.
As, for proof, now: a purse ofgold
most resolutely snatched onMonday night
and most dissolutely spent onTuesday morning,
now in as low an ebb as the footof the ladder
and by and by as high a flow asthe ridge of the gallows.
By the Lord, thou sayest true,Hal.
But, I prithee, sweet wag, shallthere be gallows
standing in England when thouart king
and resolution thus fobbed as itis
with the rusty curb of oldfather antic the law?
Do not thou, when thou art king,hang a thief.
No, thou shalt.
Shall I?
O rare!
Oh, by the Lord, I'll be a bravejudge.
Thou judgest false already.
I mean that thou shalt have thehanging of the thieves
and so become a rare hangman.
Oh, Hal.
Well...
and in some sort, it jumps withmy humor
as well as waiting in the court,I can tell you.
For obtaining of suits?
Yea, for obtaining of suits,
whereof the hangman hath no leanwardrobe.
Oh, 'sblood, I'm as melancholyas a gib cat or a lugged bear.
Or an old lion?
Or a lover's lute?
Or the drone of a Lincolnshirebagpipe.
What sayest thou to a hare orthe melancholy of Moor-ditch?
Thou hast the most unsavourysimiles
and art indeed the mostcomparative,
rascalliest, sweet young prince.
Oh, I prithee, Hal, trouble meno more with vanity.
I would to God thou and I knew
where a commodity of good nameswere to be bought.
An old lord of the council ratedme the other day
in the street about you, sir,but I marked him not;
And yet he talked very wisely,but I regarded him not.
And yet he talked wisely, and inthe street too.
Thou didst well, for wisdomcries out
in the street, and no manregards it.
Ooh, ooh!
Thou hast damnable iteration
and art indeed able to corrupt asaint.
Thou hast done much harm uponme, Hal.
God forgive thee for it.
Before I knew thee, Hal, I knewnothing.
And now am I, if a man were tospeak truly,
little better than one of thewicked.
I must give over this life, andI will give it over.
By the Lord, and I do not, I'm avillain.
I'll be damned for never aking's son in Christendom.
Where shall we take a pursetomorrow, Jack?
'Zounds, where thou wilt, lad.
I'll make one.
An I do not, call me villain andbaffle me.
I see a good amendment of lifein thee--
from praying to purse-taking.
Why, Hal, 'tis my vocation.
'Tis no sin for a man to laborin his vocation.
Poins.
Now shall we know if Peto haveset a match.
O, if men were to be saved bymerit,
what hole in hell were hotenough for him?
Good morrow, Ned.
Good morrow, sweet Hal.
What says Monsieur Remorse?
What says Sir John Sack andSugar?
Jack, how agrees the devil andthee about thy soul,
that thou soldest him onGood-Friday last
for a cup of Madeira and a coldcapon's leg?
Sir John stands to his word.
He will give the devil his due.
Then art thou damned for keepingthy word with the devil.
Else he had been damned forcozening the devil.
-My lads, my lads. -Yes.
Tomorrow morning, by fouro'clock,
early at Gadshill.
There are pilgrims going toCanterbury with rich offerings
and traders riding to Londonwith fat purses.
I have vizards for you all.
You have horses for yourselves.
Peto lies tonight in Rochester.
I have bespoke supper tomorrownight in Eastcheap.
We shall do it as secure assleep.
If you will go, I will stuffyour purses full of crowns.
If you will not, tarry at homeand be hanged.
Hear ye, Edward.
If I tarry at home and go not,I'll hang you for going.
You will, chops?
Hal, wilt thou make one?
Who, I, rob?
I, a thief?
Not I, by my faith.
There's neither honesty,manhood, nor good fellowship
in thee, nor thou camest not ofthe blood royal
if thou darest not stand for tenshillings.
Sir John, I prithee, leave theprince and me alone.
I will lay him down such reasonsfor this adventure
that he shall go.
Well, God give thee the spiritof persuasion
and him the ears of profiting,
that what thou speakest may move
and what he hears may bebelieved,
that the true prince may, forrecreation sake,
prove a false thief,
for the poor abuses of the timewant countenance.
Farewell!
You shall find me in Eastcheap.
Farewell, thou latter spring!
Farewell, all-hallown summer!
Now, my good, sweet honey lord,
ride with us tomorrow.
I have a jest to execute that Icannot manage alone.
Falstaff, Bardolph, and Peto
shall rob those men that we havealready waylaid.
Yourself and I shall not bethere.
And when they have the booty, ifyou and I do not rob them,
then cut this head off from myshoulders.
How shall we part with them insetting forth?
Why, we will set forth before orafter them.
'Tis like that they will know usby our horses, by our habits,
by every other appointment, tobe ourselves.
Tut; our horses, they shall notsee.
I'll tie them in the wood.
Our vizards, we will changeafter we leave them.
And, sirrah, I have cases ofbuckram for the nonce
to immask our noted outwardgarments.
Yea, but I doubt they will betoo hard for us.
Well, for two of them, I knowthem to be
as true-bred cowards as everturned back.
And as for the third, if hefight longer
than he sees reason, I'llforswear arms.
The virtue of this jest shall be
the incomprehensible lies thissame fat rogue
will tell,when we meet atsupper:
how thirty, at least, he foughtwith;
what wards, what blows, whatextremities he endured.
And in the reproof of this livesthe jest.
Well, I will go with thee.
Provide us all things necessary.
Meet me tomorrow night inEastcheap.
There, I'll sup.
Farewell.
Farewell, my lord.
I know you all
and will a while uphold theunyoked humor
of your idleness.
Yet herein will I imitate thesun,
who doth permit the base,contagious clouds
to smother up his beauty fromthe world
that, when he please again to behimself,
being wanted, he may be morewonder'd at
by breaking through the foul andugly mists of vapors
that did seem to strangle him.
If all the year were playingholidays,
to sport would be as tedious asto work.
But when they seldom come, theywish'd for come,
and nothing pleaseth but rareaccidents.
So when this loose behavior Ithrow off
and pay the debt I neverpromised,
by how much better than my wordI am,
by so much shall I falsify men'shopes.
And like bright metal on asullen ground,
my reformation, glittering o'ermy fault,
shall show more goodly andattract more eyes
than that which hath no foil toset it off.
I'll so offend to make offense askill,
redeeming time when men thinkleast I will.
My blood hath been too cold andtemperate,
unapt to stir at theseindignities.
And you have found me,
for, accordingly, you tread uponmy patience.
But be sure I will fromhenceforth
rather be myself, mighty and tobe fear'd,
than my condition,
which hath been smooth as oil,soft as young down,
and therefore lost that title ofrespect
which the proud soul ne'er paysbut to the proud.
Our house, my sovereign liege,little deserves
the scourge of greatness to beused on it.
And that same greatness toowhich our own hands
have holp to make so portly.
My lord--
Worcester!
Get thee gone!
For I do see danger anddisobedience in thine eye.
Oh, sir, your presence is toobold and peremptory,
and majesty might never yetendure
the moody frontier of a servantbrow.
You have good leave to leave us.
When we need your use andcounsel,
we shall send for you.
You were about to speak.
Yea, my lord.
Those prisoners in yourhighness' name demanded,
which Harry Percy here atHolmedon took,
were, as he says, not with suchstrength denied
as is deliver'd to your majesty.
Either envy, therefore, ormisprison
is guilty of this fault and notmy son.
My liege, I did deny noprisoners.
But I remember, when the fightwas done,
when I was dry with rage andextreme toil,
breathless and faint,leaningupon my sword,
came there a certain lord, neat,and trimly dress'd,
fresh as a bridegroom.
And his chin new reap'd show'd
like a stubble-land atharvest-home.
He was perfumed like a milliner,and 'twixt his finger
and his thumb, he held apouncet-box,
which ever and anon he gave hisnose
and took't away again; whotherewith angry,
when it next came there,,took itin snuff.
And still he smiled and talk'd.
And as the soldiers bore deadbodies by,
he call'd them untaught knaves,unmannerly,
to bring a slovenly, unhandsomecorse
betwixt the wind and hisnobility.
With many holiday, and ladyterms, he question'd me.
Amongst the rest,
demanded my prisoners in yourmajesty's behalf.
I then, all smarting with mywounds being cold,
to be so pester'd with apopinjay,
out of my grief and myimpatience
answer'd neglectingly I know notwhat.
He should or he should not.
For he made me mad to see himshine so brisk
and smell so sweet
and talk so like awaiting-gentlewoman
of guns and drums and wounds.
God save the mark!
And telling me the sovereign'stthing on earth
was parmaceti for an inwardbruise.
And that it was great pity, soit was,
this villainous salt-petreshould be digg'd out
of the bowels of the harmlessearth,
which many a good tall fellowhad destroy'd so cowardly.
And but for these vile guns,
he would himself have been asoldier.
This bald unjointed chat of his,my lord,
I answer'd indirectly, as Isaid.
And I beseech you, let not hisreport come current
for an accusation betwixt mylove and your high majesty.
The circumstance consider'd,good my lord,
whate'er Lord Harry Percy thenhad said
to such a person and in such aplace,
at such a time, and all the restretold,
may reasonably die and neverrise
to do him wrong or any wayimpeach
what then he said, so he unsayit now.
Why, yet he doth deny hisprisoners.
But with proviso and exception,
that we at our own charge shallransom straight
his brother-in-law, the foolishMortimer,
who, on my soul, hath wilfullybetray'd
the lives of those that he didlead to fight
against that great magician,damn'd Glendower,
whose daughter, as we hear,
that Mortimer hath latelymarried.
Shall our coffers, then, beemptied
to redeem a traitor home?
Shall we buy treason and indentwith fears,
when they have lost andforfeited themselves?
No, on the barren mountains, lethim starve,
for I shall never hold that manmy friend
whose tongue shall ask me forone penny cost
to ransom home revoltedMortimer.
Revolted Mortimer?
He never did fall off, mysovereign liege,
but by the chance of war
to prove that true needs but onetongue
for all those wounds, thosemouthed wounds,
which valiantly he took
when on the gentle Severn'ssedgy bank,
in single opposition, hand tohand,
he did confound the best part ofan hour
in changing hardiment with greatGlendower.
Three times they breathed, andthree times did they drink,
upon agreement, of swiftSevern's flood,
who then, affrighted with theirbloody looks,
ran fearfully among thetrembling reeds
and hid his crisp head in thehollow bank,
bloodstained with those valiantcombatants!
Never did base and rotten policycolor her working
with such deadly wounds.
Nor never could the nobleMortimer receive so many,
and all willingly.
Then let not him be slander'dwith revolt!
Thou dost belie him, Percy.
Thou dost belie him.
He never did encounter withGlendower.
I tell thee, he durst as wellhave met the devil alone
as Owen Glendower for an enemy!
Art thou not ashamed?
But, sirrah, henceforth
let me not hear you speak ofMortimer.
Send me your prisoners with thespeediest means,
or you shall hear in such a kindfrom me
as will displease you.
My Lord Northumberland,
we license your departure withyour son.
Send us your prisoners, or youwill hear of it.
An if the devil come and roarfor them,
I will not send them.
I will after straight and tellhim,
for I will ease my heart, albeitI make a hazard of my head.
What, drunk with choler?
Stay and pause awhile.
Here comes your uncle.
Speak of Mortimer!
'Zounds, I will speak of him
and let my soul want mercy if Ido not join with him.
Yea, on his part, I'll empty allthese veins
and shed my dear blood drop bydrop in the dust.
But I will lift the nobleMortimer
as high in the air as thisunthankful king,
as this ingrate and canker'dBolingbroke.
Brother, the king hath made yournephew mad.
Who struck this heat up after Iwas gone?
He will, forsooth, have all myprisoners.
When I urged the ransom onceagain of my wife's brother,
then his cheek look'd pale,
and on my face he turn'd an eyeof death,
trembling even at the name ofMortimer.
I cannot blame him.
Was not he proclaim'd by Richardthat dead is
the next of blood?
Peace, cousin. Say no more.
And now I will unclasp a secretbook,
and to your quick-conceivingdiscontents,
I'll read you matter deep anddangerous,
as full of peril and adventurousspirit
as to o'er-walk a currentroaring loud
on the unsteadfast footing of aspear.
If he fall in, good night!
Or sink or swim.
Send danger from the east untothe west,
so honor cross it from the northto south,
and let them grapple.
O, the blood more stirs
to rouse a lion than to start ahare.
Imagination of some greatexploit
drives him beyond the bounds ofpatience.
By heaven, methinks it were aneasy leap
to pluck bright honor from thepale-faced moon
or dive into the bottom of thedeep,
where fathom-line could nevertouch the ground,
and pluck up drowned honor bythe locks
so he that doth redeem herthence
might wear without corrival allher dignities.
But out upon this half-facedfellowship!
He apprehends a world of figureshere
but not the form of what heshould attend.
Good cousin, give me audiencefor a while.
Oh, I cry you mercy.
Those same noble Scots That areyour prisoners--
I'll keep them all.
By God, he shall not have a Scotof them.
No, if a Scot should save hissoul, he shall not.
I'll keep them, by this hand.
You start away and lend no earunto my purposes.
Those prisoners, you shall keep.
Nay, I will. That's flat.
He said he would not ransomMortimer,
forbad my tongue to speak ofMortimer.
But I will find him when he liesasleep,
and in his ear, I'll holla,"Mortimer!"
Nay, I'll have a starling shallbe taught
to speak nothing but "Mortimer"
and give it him to keep hisanger still in motion.
Hear you, cousin; a word.
All studies here I solemnlydefy,
save how to gall and pinch thisBolingbroke
and that same sword-and-bucklerPrince of Wales.
But that his father loves himnot
and would be glad he met withsome mischance,
I'd have him poison'd with a potof ale.
Fare you well, kinsman.
I'll talk to you when you'rebetter temper'd to attend.
Why, what a wasp-stung andimpatient fool art thou
to break into this woman's mood,
tying thine ear to no tongue butthine own.
Why, look you, I am whipp'd andscourged with rods,
nettled and stung with pismires
when I hear of this vilepolitician, Bolingbroke.
In Richard's time-- what do youcall the place?
A plague upon it; it is inGloucestershire.
'Twas where the madcap duke hisuncle kept, his uncle York,
where I first bow'd my knee untothis king of smiles,
this Bolingbroke.
'Sblood!
When you and he came back fromRavenspurgh.
At Berkley castle.
You say true.
Why, what a candy deal ofcourtesy
this fawning greyhound then didproffer me.
Look, "when his infant fortunecame to age,"
And "gentle Harry Percy," and"kind cousin."
Oh, the devil take suchcozeners!
God forgive me.
Good uncle, tell your tale.
I have done.
Nay, if you have not, to itagain.
We will stay your leisure.
I have done, i' faith!
Then once more to your Scottishprisoners.
Deliver them up without theirransom straight,
and make the Douglas' son youronly mean
for powers in Scotland,
which, for divers reasons whichI shall send you written,
be assured, shall easily begranted.
You, my lord,
your son in Scotland being thusemploy'd,
shall secretly into the bosomcreep
of that same noble prelate, thearchbishop.
Of York, is it not?
True, who bears hard hisbrother's death at Bristol,
the Lord Scroop.
I speak not this in estimation,as what I think might be,
but what I know is ruminated,plotted, and set down
and only stays but to behold theface
of that occasion that shallbring it on.
I smell it.
Upon my life, it will do well.
Before the game is afoot, thoustill let'st slip.
Why, it cannot choose but be anoble plot.
And then the power of Scotlandand of York
to join with Mortimer, ha?
And so they shall.
Upon my life, it is exceedinglywell aim'd.
And 'tis no little reason bidsus speed,
to save our heads by raising ofa head,
for, bear ourselves as even aswe can,
the king will always think himin our debt
and think we think ourselvesunsatisfied,
till he hath found a time to payus home.
And see already how he dothbegin
to make us strangers to hislooks of love.
He does. He does.
We'll be revenged upon him.
Cousin, farewell.
No further go in this
than I by letters shall directyour course.
When time is ripe, which will besuddenly,
I'll steal to Glendower and LordMortimer,
where you and Douglas and ourpowers at once,
as I will fashion it, shallhappily meet
to bear our fortunes in our ownstrong arms,
which now we hold at muchuncertainty.
Farewell, good brother.
We shall thrive, I trust.
Uncle, adieu.
Oh, let the hours be short
till fields and blows and groansapplaud our sport.